.TH "MMB" 5 "2020-07-17 18:35 GMT" Youngman \" -*- nroff -*-

.SH SYNOPSIS

The MMB file consists of a table of disc image metadata followed by
all the disc images, catenated together.

.SH DISC TABLE

The disc table occupies 32 (0x20) sectors beginning at offset 0 in the
MMB file.  In other words it is 8192 bytes long.  Each disc is
described in a 16 (0x10) byte record (meaning that up to 511 discs can
be stored).

The Disc Table has a 16-byte header:

.TS
tab(|) allbox;
lb lb
l l.
Offset (hex)|Meaning
0x00|Low byte of ID of disk to "insert" in drive 0 on boot
0x01|Low byte of ID of disk to "insert" in drive 1 on boot
0x02|Low byte of ID of disk to "insert" in drive 2 on boot
0x03|Low byte of ID of disk to "insert" in drive 3 on boot
0x04|High byte of ID of disk to "insert" in drive 0 on boot
0x05|High byte of ID of disk to "insert" in drive 1 on boot
0x06|High byte of ID of disk to "insert" in drive 2 on boot
0x07|High byte of ID of disk to "insert" in drive 3 on boot
0x08 - 0x0F|not used
.TE


After the header there is a sequence of 16-byte records giving the
metadata for each disc.
Disc 0 is described at offset 16 (0x10) in
the disc table, disc 1 at offset 32 (0x20) and so on.  Each record
looks like this:

.TS
tab(|) allbox;
lb lb
l l.
Record offset (hex)|Meaning
0x00 - 0x0B|Disc Name
0x0C - 0x0E|not used
0x0F|Disc Type
.TE

The Disc Type field specifies whether this entry actually represents a
disc image or not:

.TS
tab(|) allbox;
lb lb
l l.
Disc Type|Meaning
0x00|Read-only
0x0F|Read-write
0xF0|Unormatted
0xFF|This disc number is not valid
.TE

.SH DISC IMAGES

All disc images are 204800 bytes (80 tracks times 10 sectors per track
times 256 bytes per sector) long.  511 disc images are supported.  The
first of these (for disc 0) begins directly after the Disc Table.

In Acorn DFS file systems, sectors are always 256 bytes long.

.SH BUGS
Please report inaccuracies or other defects in this document to
james@youngman.org.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dfs (1),
.BR imgtool (1),
.BR floptool (1),
.BR losetup (1),
.br
.UR https://github.com/sweharris/MMB_Utils
MMB_Utils by Stephen Harris
.UE
.br
.UR https://web.archive.org/web/20171002201228/https://swhs.home.xs4all.nl/bbc/mmbeeb/index_files/DUTILS.pdf
DUTILS.pdf
.UE
